		   Mailbox Naming Rules in c-client
			     Mark Crispin
			   10 November 1992


     Mailboxes are named in a manner that there always exists a name,
called the ``unambiguous name,'' which identifies the mailbox and the
mechanism (that is, c-client driver) used to access the data without
any confusion.  A mailbox may also have some number of shorter names,
called ``ambiguous names,'' which should also identify the proper
mailbox but which could, in certain circumstances, refer to more than
one mailbox using different technologies for each.

     These ambiguity issues come up primarily with some of the newer
and proposed mail drivers, all of which have namespace needs which
were not addressed with c-client's traditional drivers.

     To resolve these issues, the requirement of the existance of an
``unambiguous name'' stated above has been added.  Furthermore, the
namespace has been partitioned, both to delimit namespace boundaries
and to reserve large areas for future expansion.  The rules for this
namespace partitioning are indented in this document along with the
identity of the rule-maker for that rule.

	[MRC]
	The name ``INBOX'' in uppercase, lowercase, or any mix, is
	specially defined to be the user's primary mailbox.  It is
	not permitted to have an INBOX in more than one technology.

	[MRC]
	Names which begin with an alphanumeric character, that is,
	digits 0-9 and letters A-Z and a-z, are defined to be
	ambiguous names.  c-client will look for ambiguous names
	ONLY in the same technology as the INBOX mailbox.  For
	example, if the user's INBOX is in Tenex format, ``foo''
	can not be used to reference a Berkeley mailbox.  If the
	user has no INBOX, then ambiguous names can not be used
	at all.

    The rules below are defined and used by known c-client drivers to
assist in specifying unambiguous names.  Note that not all of these
are valid in all environments; in particularly, they require that the
driver be appropriate for the local platform and lunk into the
application.

     It is the responsibility of the author of any new drivers to
define a set of rules for unambiguous naming which do not conflict
with existing rules, and to see to it that this document is updated to
register those new rules.  Any new rules should leave room for future
rules in the namespace; it is *not* acceptable to have a rule which
begins ``Names which begin with any other character than these...''!!
Other than these two guidelines, there are no specific requirements
for new rules.

	[MRC]
	Names which begin with an ``/'' refer to objects in a
	Unix filesystem, identified from the root.  Since there
	may be multiple drivers which operate on objects in a
	filesystem, it is necessary to examine the type of object
	and its contents to determine the appropriate driver.

	[MRC]
	Names which begin with an ``~'' refer to objects in a
	Unix filesystem, identified from a home directory.  Since
	there may be multiple drivers which operate on objects in a
	filesystem, it is necessary to examine the type of object
	and its contents to determine the appropriate driver.
	[BUG: home directories other than than the logged-in user's
	 are not yet implemented.]

	[MRC]
	Names which begin with an ``+'' refer to objects in a
	filesystem, identified a well-defined manner.  Since there
	may be multiple drivers which operate on objects in a
	filesystem, it is necessary to examine the type of object
	and its contents to determine the appropriate driver.
	[BUG: This is not yet implemented.  Is it needed?  Should
	 it supercede the / and ~ rules?]

	[MRC]
	Names which begin with an ``*'' character refer to locally
	spooled USENET news.  For example, ``*comp.mail.misc''
	refers to the newsgroup ``comp.mail.misc'' on the local
	system.

	[MRC]
	Names which begin with an ``{'' character refer to IMAP
	mailboxes.  Note that the IMAP2 driver has additional
	syntax rules.  An IMAP2 mailbox is of the form:
	 ``{'' <host> [``:'' <port>] ``}'' [<remote mailbox>]
	where the port defaults to 143 and the remote mailbox
	defaults to INBOX.

	[LGL]
	<<<%Carmel% or whatever defined here>>>

     Naming rules for new drivers should be added above this line.

     The rule-makers are identified as follows:

[LGL] Laurence Lundblade, LGL@CAC.Washington.EDU
[MRC] Mark Crispin, MRC@CAC.Washington.EDU
